Lesson 78
WORDS: situation
QUESTION: What would you do if you saw someone taking something from a shop without paying? If I saw ...; I'd ...
QUESTION: What do people normally do in situations like that? People normally... in situations like that
QUESTION: Do police officers often find themselves in dangerous situations? Yes, police officers...
WORDS: suppose
WORDS: thirst
QUESTION: What do you suppose'd happen if there were suddenly no water in the world? I suppose we'd all die of thirst if there...
QUESTION: If you only slept two hours tonight, how do you suppose you'd feel tomorrow morning? If I only.... I suppose I'd feel very tired tomorrow morning
GRAMMAR: The word "supposing" can be used in a similar way to "if" when we want someone to imagine a particular situation. Therefore, we often use it in conditional sentences and say, for example, "Supposing you had no money, what would you do?"
QUESTION: Supposing today were Sunday, where'd you be now? Supposing today were Sunday, I'd be...
QUESTION: Supposing you lost your passport, what would you do? Supposing I lost my passport, I'd immediately tell the police
WORDS: hotter and hotter, more and more
QUESTION: Does it get hotter and hotter as we go towards the north of Europe? No, it doesn't get ...; it gets colder and colder
QUESTION: Do people usually become richer and richer as they become older? Yes, people usually become...
QUESTION: Why? Because they usually earn more and more money
QUESTION: Does good wine usually become cheaper and cheaper as it becomes older? No, good wine doesn't...; it usually becomes more and more expensive
WORDS: ready
WORDS: marriage
QUESTION: How long does it take you to get ready to go out in the morning? It takes me about... to get ready to...
QUESTION: When do you think you'll be ready to take the exam at the end of this book? I think I'll be ready... in about... weeks' time
QUESTION: Are you always ready to lend people money? Yes, I'm always ... - No, I'm not always...
QUESTION: Do you think most people are ready for marriage when they are eighteen years old? Yes, I think... - No. I don't think..
WORDS: whereabouts
QUESTION: If the government of your country decided to build a new national sports stadium, whereabouts do you think it should be? If the government of my country.... I think..
WORDS: describe
WORDS: description, just
QUESTION: Describe someone you know, please (one of your family or friends). I'll describe (my uncle: he's tall and thin; he has black hair etc.)
QUESTION: Describe the place where you live. The place where I live is (by the sea; it's quite large; there are some factories just outside it etc.)
QUESTION: What's he doing? He's describing the place where he lives
QUESTION: Do you think it's a good enough description? Yes. I think it's... ~ No. I don't think it's ...
WORDS: correct
WORDS: incorrect
QUESTION: Is it correct to say "The book was writing by him"? No, it isn't...; we must say "The book was written by him"
QUESTION: Is it correct that 4 + 5 = 11? No, it isn't...; it's incorrect
WORDS: as soon as, over
QUESTION: What did you do as soon as you came into the classroom? I sat down as soon as I...
QUESTION: What'll you do as soon as the lesson is over? I'll stand up, go home etc. as soon as...
QUESTION: When you lend something, like money for example, do you prefer the other person to give it back on a certain date or just as soon as possible? When I lend something.... I prefer...
WORDS: strange
QUESTION: Who's the strangest person you know? The strangest person I know is ...
WORDS: they = he or she
GRAMMAR: We sometimes use the words "they", "them" etc. to talk about just one person when we don't know if the person is a man or woman. For example, "There is somebody in the next room and they are making a lot of noise. I'm going to ask them to be quieter".
QUESTION: When do we use the words "they", "them" etc. to talk about just one person? We use the words "they", "them" etc.... when we don't know if the person is a man or woman
QUESTION: If someone lost their passport, what advice would you give them? If someone lost their passport. I'd tell them that they should immediately go to the police
WORDS: shut, shut up, be quiet
GRAMMAR: The verb "to shut up" means the same as "to be quiet" but is much less polite, and we generally use it when we are angry.
QUESTION: What verb can we use instead of the verb "to close"? We can use the verb "to shut" instead of...
QUESTION: If some friends were talking loudly while you were trying to study, what would you say? If some... while I was trying to study. I'd say “Could you be quiet, please?"
QUESTION: And if they carried on talking loudly even after that, what might you then say? If they._, I might then say "Shut up!"
WORDS: choose
QUESTION: Do you always choose your clothes yourself or does someone else ever help you to choose them? Yes, I always choose my clothes myself - No, I don't always choose... myself; sometimes someone helps me _
QUESTION: If you had to choose between having $10,000 now or $40,000 in ten years' time, which'd you choose? If I had to choose between having .... I'd choose ...
OTHER: Why?
DICTATION: To cross the road/ without looking both ways/ would be very dangerous./ When we say/ we should study,/ it means that we have an alternative,/ but that studying/ is the right thing to do;/ it is the best idea./ Although there were no bones/ in the meat,/ it had been cooked/ so badly/ that it was impossible to eat./ English has its origins/ in several other languages./ The war was directly caused/ by the actions of the president.

Lesson 79
WORDS: recognize
QUESTION: Do you think you'd be able to recognize me if we met each other again in thirty years' time? Yes, I think I'd be able to recognize you if... - No, I don't think I'd be able to recognize you if...
QUESTION: Would you say you were good at recognizing people after not having seen them for several years? Yes, I'd say I was good at... ~ No, I wouldn't say I was good at...
WORDS: rather
QUESTION: Would you say you spoke English rather well now? Yes. I'd say I spoke...
WORDS: would rather
GRAMMAR: "Would rather" means the same as "would prefer". The difference is that we put the infinitive without "to" after "would rather", whereas we put the infinitive with "to" after "would prefer".
QUESTION: What can we say instead of "I would prefer to drink tea"? We can say “I would rather drink tea" instead of ”1 would prefer to drink tea"
QUESTION: Would you rather have a cold drink than a hot drink at the moment? Yes, I'd rather have._ ~ No, I wouldn't rather have -
QUESTION: Which would you rather do this evening: read a book, watch television, or go to the cinema? I'd rather... than „
QUESTION: Would you rather go on a long flight or a long train journey? I'd rather... than
WORDS: faith
WORDS: Christian
QUESTION: Do you have very much faith in your government? Yes. I have a lot of faith in my government - No. I don't have very much faith in my government
QUESTION: About how old is the Christian faith? The Christian faith is about two thousand years old
WORDS: "Will" and "to be going to”
WORDS: predict, prediction
WORDS: just this moment
GRAMMAR: Two common ways to talk about the future are: 
I will go to London tomorrow (future simple) 
I am going to go to London tomorrow ("to be going to") 
These different forms communicate different ideas. 
One common use of the future simple is to communicate that we have just this moment decided to do something. For example, if I say “It's getting cold: I'll close the window”. I am communicating that I have just this moment decided to close the window. 
We can also use the future simple to make a prediction. For example, if I say to a friend "Don’t worry about your exam tomorrow: I'm sure it will be easy". I am making a prediction that the exam will be easy.
QUESTION: Tell me one common use of the future simple, please. One common use of the future simple is to communicate that we have just this moment decided to do something
QUESTION: Give me an example, please. Sorry I forgot to bring the money for you; I'll bring it tomorrow, I promise!
QUESTION: Tell me another common use of the future simple, please. Another common use of the future simple is to make a prediction
QUESTION: Give me an example, please. I can't remember what she looks like but I'm sure I'll recognize her when I see her
GRAMMAR: "To be going to" can also be used to make a prediction, but a prediction using information we already have. For example, if I say "Oh, look at the sky; I think it’s going to rain". I am predicting rain because I can see that the sky is dark and cloudy now. Another common use of "to be going to" is to communicate a future intention; something that we have already decided to do. For example, if I say "I’m going to buy a new car", I am communicating that I have already decided to buy a new car; it is my intention to buy one.
QUESTION: Tell me one common use of "to be going to", please. One common use of “to be going to" is to make a prediction using information we already have
QUESTION: Give me an example, please. Be careful; that wine glass is going to fall off the table!
QUESTION: Tell me another common use of "to be going to", please. Another common use of "to be going to" is to communicate a future intention; something that we have already decided to do
QUESTION: Give me an example, please. I'm going to go to the cinema next Saturday
GRAMMAR: To communicate your future intentions, it is important to remember to use "to be going to", not the future simple. If you decide to watch a film tonight, and then later you tell a friend what you have decided to do, you should say "I'm going to watch a film tonight". It is wrong in this situation to say "I will watch a film tonight". This is a very common mistake.
QUESTION: Tell me what you have decided to do this afternoon (or this evening), please. This afternoon (or this evening). I’m going to visit a friend etc.
WORDS: stairs, upstairs, downstairs
WORDS: living room, lift
QUESTION: In a house, are the bedrooms usually downstairs? No. in a house they’re usually upstairs
QUESTION: And is the living room usually upstairs? No, the living room...; it's usually downstairs
QUESTION: If you had to get to a room that was on the tenth floor of a building, would you take the stairs or the lift? If I had to.... I'd take the lift
WORDS: lip, lipstick
QUESTION: Is this my top lip? No, it isn’t your top lip; it’s your bottom lip
QUESTION: Do you think women look better with or without lipstick? I think women look _
WORDS: system
QUESTION: What system of government do you have in your country? We have a ... system of government in my country
WORDS: sail, sailor
QUESTION: Is sailing a popular sport in your country? Yes, sailing's... in my country - No, sailing isn't... in my country
QUESTION: Would you like to be a sailor? Yes, I'd like to ... - No, I wouldn't like to...
DICTATION: I do not get up/ immediately after I wake up,/ but I lie in bed/ for a few minutes,/ We sometimes/ go through the summer/ without going for a swim./ There is no comparison/ between the prices on the website/ and those in the shop./ The fridge he bought/ from the shop on the corner/ was faulty./ It made him angry/ and he took a long time/ to calm down./ That guard dog/ is much too dangerous/ to keep in the house.

Lesson 80
WORDS: Emphatic "do", deny, exclamation, stress
WORDS: I do speak English!, I do like this book!
GRAMMAR: As you already know, we use the auxiliary verb "do" for the present simple, but only in questions and negative sentences; it is not used in the positive. For example, we say "Do you speak English?" and "I do not speak English", but we say "I speak English", with no auxiliary "do". 
However, when we want to be emphatic about something, we can also use "do" in a positive sentence. For example, if someone says to you "You don't speak English", you can reply "Yes I do speak English!" In situations like this, we put a heavy stress on the word "do".
QUESTION: When do we use the auxiliary verb "do" in a positive sentence with the present simple tense? We use the... when we want to be emphatic
GRAMMAR: We usually use the emphatic "do" when we want to deny something that someone has said because we know it is not true. For example, if someone says to you "You don't eat healthy food", you can deny this strongly by saying "Yes I do eat healthy food!"
QUESTION: When do we usually use the emphatic "do"? We usually use ... when we want to deny something that someone has said because we know it is not true
QUESTION: Give me an example, please. For example, if somebody says “You don't eat enough vegetables”, I can reply “Yes I do eat enough vegetables!"
QUESTION: Reply to this sentence using the emphatic form, please: you don't know what I've got in my pocket. Yes I do know what you've got in your pocket!
GRAMMAR: Make sure you and the student put a heavy stress on the word "do" each time you use It emphatically. 
GRAMMAR: Another use of the emphatic "do" is in an exclamation. For example. "I do like this book!" and "He does speak good English!"
QUESTION: Tell me another use of the emphatic "do", please. Another use... is in an exclamation
QUESTION: Give me an example, please. I do hate noisy children! She does write beautifully!
GRAMMAR: Of course, we can use the emphatic "do" with the past simple too. For example, "I did study hard last year!" and "I did like that book you gave me!"
GRAMMAR: Reply to this sentence using the emphatic form in the past, please:
QUESTION: He didn't cycle home yesterday. Yes he did cycle home yesterday!
GRAMMAR: Remember that we only use the emphatic "do" with the present and past simple. With other tenses, we just stress the first auxiliary verb, or the negative word in the verb. For example. "Yes I can speak English well!" and "No I won’t make a mistake!"
QUESTION: Reply to these sentences using emphatic forms, please:
QUESTION: You can't read quickly. Yes I can read quickly!
QUESTION: The weather's been good. No the weather has not been good!
QUESTION: She doesn't love her family. Yes she does love her family!
QUESTION: He came to school early. No he didn't come to school early!
QUESTION: We shouldn't tell him the news. Yes we should tell him the news!
OTHER: hit
WORDS: arrest
QUESTION: What am I doing? You're hitting the table with your hand
QUESTION: Have you ever hit your head getting into a car? Yes, I've hit my head ... - No, I've never hit my head...
QUESTION: What'd happen if you hit a policeman? If I hit a policeman, he'd arrest me
QUESTION: Have you ever seen anyone arrested? Yes, I've seen someone arrested ~ No, I’ve never seen anyone arrested
WORDS: fair, fairly, just
WORDS: moderate
WORDS: unfair
GRAMMAR: The word "fair" has five different meanings, which are as follows:_(fair hair), _(industrial and agricultural fairs, for example),_(just). _ (moderate), and_(fun fair). The teacher translates the five meanings.
QUESTION: What are the five meanings of the word "fair"? The five meanings of the word "fair*' are ...
QUESTION: Do people become darker and darker in hair colour as we go towards the north of Europe? No. people don't...; they become fairer and fairer
QUESTION: Have you ever been to an industrial or agricultural fair? Yes, I've been to... - No, I've never been to...
QUESTION: What kind?
QUESTION: If I asked everyone in this room twenty questions but only asked you two, would that be fair? No, if you asked... but only asked me two, it wouldn't be fair; it'd be unfair
QUESTION: Do they ever have a funfair in this town? Yes, they sometimes have... - No, they never have...
QUESTION: Do you speak English fairly well now? Yes, I speak English fairly well now
WORDS: pleasure
QUESTION: Is it a great pleasure for you to get up in the morning? Yes, it's a great pleasure for me... - No, it isn't a great pleasure for me...
QUESTION: Why or why not? Because I find my work interesting - Because, when I get up, it's often cold
QUESTION: Do you think it's possible for life to be full of pleasure all the time? Yes. I think ... - No, I don't think ...
WORDS: experiment
QUESTION: Do you think it's wrong to use animals for experiments? Yes, I think it's _ ~ No. I don't think it's _
WORDS: discover
WORDS: When was America discovered by Europeans, and who discovered it? America was discovered by Europeans in 1492 by Christopher Columbus, or by Leif Ericsson about the year 1000
WORDS: Is the internet useful for discovering new information? Yes, the internet...

Lesson 81
WORDS: scientist
QUESTION: Would you like to be a scientist? Yes, I'd like... - No, I wouldn't like ...
QUESTION: Why or why not?
WORDS: tissue
QUESTION: What do we call a paper handkerchief? We call a paper handkerchief a tissue
WORDS: division
QUESTION: How many football divisions are there in your country? There are ... football divisions in my country
QUESTION: Which division's your home town in? My home town's in the... division
WORDS: in, within, on the other hand
GRAMMAR: The time now is (6 o'clock). If I went out of the room and said to you "I'll be back in an hour's time", it would mean that I'd be back at (7 o'clock). If, on the other hand, I went out of the room and said "I'll be back within an hour". It'd mean that I'd be back at any time between now and (7 o'clock).
QUESTION: The time now is (6 o'clock). If I went out of the room and said "I'll be back in an hour", at what time would I return? If you went.... you'd return at (7 o'clock)
QUESTION: If, on the other hand, I went out of the room and said "I'll be back within an hour", at what time would I return? If, on the other hand, you went.... you'd return at any time between now and (7 o'clock)
QUESTION: Do you think life will be discovered on other planets within the next hundred years? Yes. I think... - No, I don'tthink...
WORDS: main, mainly, shopping
QUESTION: Which is the main shopping street in this town? ... is the main shopping...
QUESTION: Do you think that the difference between the people of one country and those of another is mainly a question of language? Yes, I think... - No. I don't think..
WORDS: sing - sang - sung
QUESTION: What are the three forms of "sing"? The three forms of "sing" are "sing, sang, sung"
QUESTION: Why are people so often in the habit of singing to themselves in the bathroom? People are so often ... maybe because their voices sound better in the bathroom
QUESTION: If you sang in public for a day (in the street, for example), how much do you think you'd earn? If I sang in public for a day, I think I'd earn about...
QUESTION: Have you ever sung in public? Yes, I've... - No, I've never...
WORDS: profit
WORDS: business
WORDS: loss
QUESTION: If you bought a business for $1,000,000 and sold it again later for $250,000, would you be making a profit? No. if I bought.... I wouldn't be making a profit; I'd be making a loss
QUESTION: How much would your loss be? My loss'd be $750,000
WORDS: Future perfect, I will have eaten
GRAMMAR: We use the future perfect when we are thinking about time before and up to a specific point in the future. For example, if you know that you will be in bed at midnight tonight, you can tell a friend "Please don't phone me at midnight; I will have gone to bed". This communicates that you will go to bed before midnight and that, at midnight, you will be in bed, probably sleeping.
QUESTION: When do we use the future perfect? We use the future perfect when we are thinking about time before and up to a specific point in the future
QUESTION: Give me an example, please. When you arrive at my house, I will have cooked dinner
QUESTION: What does that sentence mean? That sentence means that I will finish cooking dinner before you arrive at my house; when you arrive, dinner will be ready
QUESTION: Tell me the difference between these two sentences: "At 9 o'clock, I will eat my dinner" and "At 9 o'clock, I will have eaten my dinner".
QUESTION: The differenceis that "At 9 o'clock, I will eat my dinner" means I will start to eat my dinner at 9 o'clock, whereas "At 9 o'clock, I will have eaten my dinner" means that my dinner will already be finished at 9 o'clock
QUESTION: Will you have had your dinner before midnight tonight? Yes, I'll have had my- No. I won’t have had my _
QUESTION: Will we have left this room in three hours' time? Yes, well have left _ - No, we won’t have left...
QUESTION: At 10 o'clock tomorrow morning, will you already have got up? Yes, at I’ll already have got up - No. at _, I won’t already have got up
WORDS: Will most shops in this town have shut before eleven o'clock this evening? Yes, most shops in this town will have shut _
WORDS: minister, prime
QUESTION: What's a government minister? A government minister is someone who has a very important job in the government
QUESTION: Give me some examples, please. Minister for Agriculture, Foreign Minister etc.
QUESTION: What do some countries call the most important minister in the government? Some countries call... the Prime Minister
WORDS: guess
QUESTION: Are you usually able to guess a person's age? Yes, I'm usually... - No, I'm not usually ...
WORDS: coin
QUESTION: Have you got any coins in your pocket (or bag) at the moment? Yes, I've got some... - No, I haven't got any...
WORDS: Cheers!
QUESTION: In which situations do we say "Cheers!"? We say "Cheers!" to express good wishes when we have a drink with somebody, to say "thank you", and to say "goodbye"
DICTATION: In some countries,/ a lot of things used daily/ belong to the government,/ such as the roads,/ the trains, water and electricity./ The notice/ outside the building/ said that the man was wanted/ dead or alive./ Don't throw/ that piece of paper away;/ I still need it./ I haven't finished with it yet./ The little boy/ had just been given a tissue/ by his mother,/ but he immediately dropped it/ on the floor/ and made it dirty./ He sat on his own/ during the flight.

Lesson 82
WORDS: rode
QUESTION: What's the past of "ride"? The past of "ride" is "rode"
QUESTION: If you rode from here to the next town by bicycle, about how long would it take you? If I rode.... it’d take me about...
WORDS: decrease
QUESTION: Does the temperature decrease as we move from spring to summer? No, the temperature doesn't decrease...; it increases
WORDS: join, joint, shoulder, elbow
QUESTION: Do you have to join a library before you can start borrowing books? Yes, you have to _
GRAMMAR: For the following question, form a cross with your forefingers.
QUESTION: If we join two pieces of wood together like this, what do we make? If we join... like that, we make a cross
GRAMMAR: Touch your shoulder, elbow and wrist joints in turn, and ask
QUESTION: What joint of the arm is this? That joint... is the shoulder, the elbow, the wrist
WORDS: noon
QUESTION: What's another word for midday? Another word for midday is noon
WORDS: e.g. = exempli gratia = for example
WORDS: abbreviation
GRAMMAR: The letters "e.g." are the abbreviation of "exempli gratia", from the Latin, which means "for example". We use these letters in writing, but not in speaking.
QUESTION: What are the letters "e.g." the abbreviation of? The letters "e.g." are...
QUESTION: When do we use these letters? We use these letters...
WORDS: here you are, there he is
WORDS: hand, structure, finally
GRAMMAR: We use the expression "Here you are" when we hand something to somebody. For example, if you say "Can I borrow your book, please?'*. I can reply "Yes. of course you can; here you are".
QUESTION: What can we say when we hand something to somebody? When we we can say "Here you are"
GRAMMAR: We also use this same structure with the words "here" or "there" in other situations. For example, when we are trying to find a particular person and we suddenly see them, we can say "Ah. here you are!", or when we are pointing somebody out in a photograph, we can say "There he is".
QUESTION: When you finally find something after trying to find it for a long time, what can you say? When you finally... you can say "Ah, here it is!"
WORDS: state, fill in, application form
WORDS: birth, occupation
QUESTION: Do you pay taxes to the state? Yes, I pay... - No, I don't pay ...
QUESTION: Is this room in a good state or a bad state? This room's in a... state
QUESTION: When you fill in a passport application form, what must you state? When I fill in .... I must state my name, my address, my date of birth, my occupation etc.
WORDS: statement, signature
QUESTION: When you make a formal written statement to the police, do you have to put your signature at the end? Yes, when you make.... you have to _
WORDS: download, program
QUESTION: What kind of things can we download from the internet? We can download programs, songs, films _
WORDS: drunk
OTHER: fight
QUESTION: What happens if someone drinks too much alcohol? If someone..., they get drunk
QUESTION: Have you ever seen two people fighting each other in the street? Yes, I've seen ... - No, I've never seen ...
QUESTION: Where? What happened?
QUESTION: Do some people get into fights when they're drunk? Yes, some people...
WORDS: probability
QUESTION: Do you think the probability of another world war has increased or decreased in the last twenty years? I think the probability of _
WORDS: mind, brain, change one's mind
WORDS: brainy, abstract, sense
GRAMMAR: We use "mind" in the abstract sense, whereas we generally use "brain” in the physical sense.
QUESTION: What's the difference between "mind" and "brain"? The difference between "mind" and "brain" is that we use...
QUESTION: Are you in the habit of changing your mind a lot? Yes, I'm in the habit of changing my mind a lot - No, I'm not in the habit of changing my mind a lot
QUESTION: Do adults have bigger brains than young children?Yes, adults have...
QUESTION: Who's the brainiest member of your family? My... is the brainiest member of my family
WORDS: criminal
QUESTION: What happens to criminals if the police catch them? If the police catch criminals, they arrest them and take them to the police station
WORDS: gun
QUESTION: Do you have to have permission from the state to own a gun in your country? Yes, you have to have... in my country
WORDS: civilized
QUESTION: Do you think the world's more civilized nowadays than it was in the past? Yes, I think... - No, I don't think...; I think it's less civilized
WORDS: so far
QUESTION: How many people do you think you've spoken to so far today? I think I've spoken to about _
QUESTION: What does the expression "so far, so good" mean? The expression "so far, so good" means that somebody has not experienced any problems up to now
QUESTION: Give me an example, please. I'm enjoying my new job; so far. so good!

Lesson 83
WORDS: Short answers with auxiliary verbs
WORDS: Yes, I can, Yes, I would, Yes, I am
WORDS: Yes, I have, Yes, I do
GRAMMAR: We can give short answers to questions simply by using an auxiliary verb. For example: "Can you speak Spanish?" "Yes. I can." "Have you seen David?" "No. I haven't." "Will she be working?" "Yes. she will." Notice that only the first auxiliary verb is necessary. Instead of "Yes. she will be”, we can just say "Yes, she will".
GRAMMAR: Answer the following questions with short answers:
QUESTION: Will we still be here in two minutes' time? Yes, we will
QUESTION: Would you need any money if you went to the cinema and had a free ticket? No, I wouldn't
QUESTION: Can you swim? Yes, I can ~ No, I can't
QUESTION: Should you be very careful when you cross the road? Yes, you should
QUESTION: Could you read when you were three years old? Yes, I could - No, I couldn't
GRAMMAR: We can also make short answers with the verbs "be" and "have". For example: "Are you a student?" "Yes. I am." "Has he got the money?" "Yes. he has."
QUESTION: Am I the teacher? Yes, you are
QUESTION: Have you got any shoes on your feet? Yes, I have
GRAMMAR: For short answers with the present simple and past simple, we use the auxiliary "do". For example: "Does he eat meat?” "Yes, he does." "Did they tlnish the job?” "No, they didn't."
QUESTION: Do you like this part of the country? Yes, I do - No, I don't
QUESTION: Did you eat dinner at home last night? Yes, I did - No, I didn't
QUESTION: Does he/she speak his/her language during the lesson? No, he/she doesn't
QUESTION: Did people believe the world was round in the old days? No, they didn't
GRAMMAR: Of course, we don't use short answers in the lessons because it's important for you to practise speaking as much as possible.
QUESTION: Why don't we use short answers in the lessons? We don't use _ because it's important for us to practise speaking as much as possible
WORDS: rose
QUESTION: What's the past of "rise"? The past of "rise" is "rose"
QUESTION: Did the sun rise early this morning? Yes, the sun rose... - No, the sun didn't rise...
WORDS: (decimal) point
WORDS: how high, mile
WORDS: kilometre, population
QUESTION: About how high are the walls of this room in feet? The walls of this room are about... feet high
QUESTION: About how long is this table in feet? This table is about... feet long
QUESTION: If I am (5) feet (11) inches tall, about how tall do you think you are in feet and inches? If you are.... I think I'm about... feet... inch(es) tall
GRAMMAR: There are about 1.6 (one point six) kilometres in a mile.
QUESTION: About how many kilometres are there in a mile? There are about 1.6 kilometres in a mile
GRAMMAR: A kilometre equals about 0.6 (point six) of a mile.
QUESTION: If a kilometre equals about 0.6 (point six) of a mile, how far is it from here to the nearest town in miles? If a kilometre. .. it's about... mile(s) from here to ...
QUESTION: What's the population of this town? The population of this town is about...
WORDS: hurt - hurt - hurt, fell, fall over
QUESTION: What's the past of "fall"? The past of 'fall' is "fell"
QUESTION: If you fell over while you were running along the street, might you hurt yourself? Yes, if I fell over while I was running along the street, I might hurt myself
QUESTION: Have you ever been hurt while playing sport? Yes, I've been... - No, I've never been _
QUESTION: If you hurt yourself very badly, where'd you be taken to? If I hurt myself very badly, I'd be taken to hospital
WORDS: glad
QUESTION: Would you be glad to hear that you had failed an exam? No. I wouldn't be glad to hear that I'd . ..; I'd be very unhappy
QUESTION: Would you be glad if you were told you had won the lottery? Yes, I'd be glad if I were told I'd ...
WORDS: sick, unwell, vomit
QUESTION: What are two other words for "ill"? Two other words for "ill" are "sick" and "unwell"
GRAMMAR: "To be sick" can mean "to be unwell", but it can also mean "to vomit”. We usually understand the meaning from the sentence or situation.
QUESTION: What's another meaning of "to be sick" besides "to be unwell"? Another meaning of... is "to vomit"
QUESTION: What does this sentence probably mean: "The little boy was sick in the car"? That sentence probably means that the little boy vomited in the car
QUESTION: What does this sentence probably mean: "The little boy didn't go to school because he was sick"? That sentence probably means that the little boy didn't go to school because he was unwell
WORDS: repair
QUESTION: When things break, do you normally try to repair them or do you just throw them away? When things break, I normally..
WORDS: roof
QUESTION: What do we call the top covering of a house? We call.. the roof
WORDS: wind, windy
QUESTION: Do sailing boats move faster in strong winds? Yes, sailing boats...
QUESTION: Is it a windy day today? Yes, it's a... - No, it isn't a ...
WORDS: caught, just as, platform
QUESTION: What are the three forms of "catch"? The three forms of "catch" are "catch, caught, caught"
QUESTION: When was the last time you caught a cold? The last time I caught a cold was....
QUESTION: Have you ever caught a train just as it was leaving the platform? Yes, I've sometimes caught... ~ No, I've never caught ...
DICTATION: In the old days,/ people were very much afraid/ of their kings./ It is useless/ thinking about what will happen/ if they win,/ simply because they won't win./ My pen is the most useful thing/ that I possess./ Mix some wine with it,/ add some ice from the freezer,/ and then pour the lot/ into a large glass./ The two countries/ wouldn't even unite/ to protect themselves/ against their common enemy./ We chatted online/ until after midnight.

Lesson 84
WORDS: Direct speech and indirect speech
WORDS: report, refer, inverted commas
GRAMMAR: Direct speech: I said "The room is large" Indirect speech: I said that the room was large There are two ways in which we can repeat what someone has said. We can use direct speech, and give the exact words of the speaker, like this:
Mr Brown said "I like warm weather".
We can also use indirect speech, and report what Mr Brown said, like this:
Mr Brown said that he liked warm weather.
Notice that indirect speech is also called reported speech.
QUESTION: What are the two ways in which we can repeat what someone has said? The two ways... are by giving the exact words of the speaker, or by reporting what the speaker said
QUESTION: What do we call these two ways? We call these two ways direct speech and indirect speech
QUESTION: Give me an example of direct speech, please. Mr Brown said "I like warm weather"
QUESTION: Give me an example of indirect speech, please. Mr Brown said that he liked warm weather
GRAMMAR: When we change direct speech into indirect speech, we generally move the verb into the past, or further into the past. For example, we change present tenses into past tenses.
For example: 
(Direct speech) The teacher said "The room is large".
(Indirect speech) The teacher said that the room was large. 
(Direct speech) The teacher said "I have drunk the coffee". 
(Indirect speech) The teacher said that he had drunk the coffee. 
If a verb is already in the past, it often remains unchanged. However, sometimes we put it further into the past so the exact meaning is easier to understand. Think about this sentence: 
Mary said that she went to the cinema. 
Here, we don't know whether Mary said "I go to the cinema" or "I went to the cinema". In other words, we don't know if she was speaking about a habit in the present or a single visit in the past. However, we could say this instead: 
Mary said that she had been to the cinema. 
Now it becomes clearer that she was speaking about a single visit in the past.
QUESTION: What do we do with the tenses when we change direct speech into indirect speech? When we change.... we generally move the verb into the past
QUESTION: Give me an example. The teacher said "The room is large" The teacher said that the room was large.
QUESTION: What do we do if a verb is already in the past? If a verb.... it often remains unchanged, but sometimes we put it further into the past
GRAMMAR: In indirect speech, the word "will" changes to "would". We use "would” when we are speaking about the past but want to refer to a future action. 
For example: 
(Direct speech) Mary said "John will goto London". 
(Indirect speech) Mary said that John would go to London. 
You are reporting what Mary said in the past, but the word "would" refers to a future action.
QUESTION: What do we do with the word "will" when we change direct speech into indirect speech? When we change..., we change the word "will" to "would"
QUESTION: Give me an example, please. She said that John would go to London next year
GRAMMAR: I will now make some statements and I want you to tell me what I said, using indirect speech.
QUESTION: "I swim every day" - What did I say? You said that you swam every day
QUESTION: "She is speaking to you" - What did I say? You said that she was speaking to me
QUESTION: "I have just taken the pen from the table" - What did I say? You said that you had just taken the pen from the table
QUESTION: "I think I will go to London tomorrow" - What did I say? You said that you thought you would go to London tomorrow
QUESTION: "They had books in their hands when they came into the room" - What did I say? You said that they had books in their hands when they came into the room
QUESTION: "I ate too much for dinner" - What did I say? You said you had eaten too much for dinner
GRAMMAR: Notice that words like "I", "you", "my", "your" etc. sometimes need to change when direct speech becomes indirect speech. Notice also that for indirect speech we do not use inverted commas, and it is not generally necessary to use the word "that" to connect the two parts of the sentence.
QUESTION: Do we use inverted commas for indirect speech? No, we don't use...
QUESTION: Is it generally necessary to use the word "that" when we use indirect speech? No, it isn't...
QUESTION: Give me an example, please. He said that the room was large ~ He said the room was large
WORDS: flat
QUESTION: Did people in the old days believe the world was round? No. people they believed it was flat
QUESTION: Which is one of the flattest parts of this country? One of the flattest parts of this country is ...
WORDS: pity, what a pity, picnic, phrase
QUESTION: Would you think it was a great pity if you went for a picnic in the country and it rained? Yes, I'd think... if I...
QUESTION: What kind of people do you pity most? I pity... most
GRAMMAR: Translate this phrase: "What a pity".
WORDS: blow - blew - blown
QUESTION: What are the three forms of "blow"? The three forms of "blow" are "blow, blew, blown"
QUESTION: Have you ever been blown off your feet by the wind? Yes. I've been blown off my feet by the wind - No, I've never been blown off my feet by the wind
DICTATION: Please leave your dirty plates/ in the sink./ The teacher told the girl's mother/ that he found the girl's school studies/ were not as good as/ they should be./ They would rather live/ in an agricultural region/ of the country/ than a crowded city./ The actress made no apology/ for her lateness./ Customers in a shop/ are called "sir" or "madam",/ and an officer is called "sir"/ by his men./ My colleague takes great care of his car/ and lets no one else use it.

Lesson 85
WORDS: consider, decision
QUESTION: What do you consider to be the best occupation in the world? I consider... to be the best occupation in the world
QUESTION: Why must we consider carefully before making an important decision? We must... because, if we don't consider carefully, we might make a big mistake
WORDS: whatever, whenever, wherever
WORDS: whoever, limit, unlimited
WORDS: most of
GRAMMAR: The difference between the words "what" and "whatever" is that we use the word "what" in a limited sense, whereas we use the word "whatever" in a more unlimited sense. Other examples of this kind of thing are: "when - whenever"; "where - wherever"; "who - whoever".
QUESTION: What's the difference between the words "what" and "whatever"? The difference between ... is that we use the word "what" in a limited sense, whereas we use the word "whatever" in a more unlimited sense
QUESTION: If you could buy whatever you wanted, what would you buy? If I could buy whatever I wanted, I'd buy ...
QUESTION: Can you go for a holiday whenever you like? Yes, I can go for a holiday whenever I like - No, I can't go for a holiday whenever I like
QUESTION: Why or why not? Because I have to work (or study) for most of the year
QUESTION: If you could go wherever you liked in the world, where'd you go? If I could go wherever I liked in the world, I'd go to ...
QUESTION: If you could meet whoever you wanted in the world, who would you prefer to meet? If I could meet whoever I wanted in the world, I'd prefer to meet...
WORDS: truth, lie, tell the truth, tell a lie
WORDS: honest
QUESTION: Do you always tell the truth? Yes, I always... ~ No, I don't always...; sometimes I tell lies
QUESTION: Why or why not? Because I think it's important to be honest - Because it's sometimes necessary to tell lies in order not to be unpleasant
QUESTION: Do newspapers always tell the truth? No. newspapers don't...; sometimes they tell lies
QUESTION: Why do they sometimes tell lies? They sometimes tell lies because _
WORDS: miss
QUESTION: What's the opposite of the verb "to catch"? The opposite... is "to miss"
QUESTION: If I threw my pen to you, do you think you'd catch it or miss it? If you threw your pen to me, I think I'd...
QUESTION: Are you in the habit of missing trains and buses? Yes, I'm in the habit... ~ No, I'm not in the habit...
QUESTION: Why or why not? Because I always leave everything to the last minute and then have to hurry - Because I always give myself plenty of time to catch trains and buses
QUESTION: How long do you have to be away from home before you begin to miss your family and friends? I have to be away from home for about... before I begin...
QUESTION: Did you miss the last lesson? Yes. I missed... - No, I didn't miss...
QUESTION: If so, why?
WORDS: union, trade union, organization
WORDS: in favour of, pay (wages)
QUESTION: Do you think that a union of all the countries in Europe (or South America etc.) will ever be possible?, Yes, I think... will one day be possible - No, I don't think... will ever be possible
QUESTION: What is a trade union? A trade union is an organization composed of workers from a particular industry. It protects the workers and fights to improve their pay and conditions
QUESTION: Are you in favour of trade unions? Yes, I'm in favour... - No, I'm not in favour...
WORDS: rope, climb
QUESTION: What can we use rope for? We can use rope for climbing mountains, pulling things etc.
QUESTION: What'd you see if you climbed the stairs to the top of this building? If I climbed.... I'd see _
QUESTION: Is it easy to climb to the top of the music industry and stay there? No, it isn't easy it's difficult
WORDS: court, look for
QUESTION: If you lost your keys, where would you look for them first? If I lost my keys. I would _
QUESTION: Where do people go when they are looking for justice? People go to the law courts when they ...
WORDS: judge
QUESTION: Would you like the job of a judge? Yes. I'd like... - No. I wouldn't like _
WORDS: dark - darken, short - shorten
WORDS: wide - widen - width, length - lengthen
WORDS: strength - strengthen, friendship
GRAMMAR: We can form verbs from certain adjectives or nouns by adding the letters "en". For example, from the adjective "dark” we can make the verb "to darken", which means "to make darker" or "to get darker". Other examples are "short - shorten", "wide - widen" etc
QUESTION: How do we form verbs from certain adjectives or nouns? We form verbs from certain ... by adding the letters "en”
QUESTION: Give me some examples, please. dark - darken; short - shorten etc.
QUESTION: What does the verb "to darken" mean? The verb'to darken" means "to make darker" or "to get darker"
QUESTION: If our trousers are too long, what must we do to them? If our trousers.... we must shorten them
QUESTION: Do the days lengthen or shorten as we go towards summer? The days lengthen as we _
QUESTION: Do you think sport can strengthen the friendship between different countries? Yes. I think.. - No, I don't think _
GRAMMAR: An adjective or noun must have only one syllable in order for us to form a verb from it. There are also some one-syllable adjectives and nouns from which we cannot form a verb. We can't say, for example, "to smallen"; we say "to make smaller”.
QUESTION: How many syllables must an adjective or noun have in order for us to form a verb from it? An adjective or noun must have only one syllable in order for us ...
QUESTION: Can we form verbs from all adjectives and nouns of one syllable? No, we can't form verbs...
QUESTION: Give me an example of a one-syllable adjective from which we can’t form a verb? An example of a ... is "small" (or "large", "slow" etc.)
DICTATION: When we hurry./ we are not able to do things/ as well as/ when we take our time./ You can eat/ as much as you like;/ we've got plenty of sandwiches,/ crisps and biscuits./1 haven't eaten so much chocolate/ since I was a little boy./ We were late/ for an appointment with our boss,/ and so we had to run./ If I lend you some money,/ will you pay it back/ when promised?/ One should not make important decisions,/ especially about one's career,/ without thinking carefully.

Lesson 86
WORDS: obvious
QUESTION: Give me a sentence with the word "obvious". It is obvious from what he says that he is not interested in the job
QUESTION: Do small children sometimes say they aren't tired when they obviously are? Yes, small children sometimes...
QUESTION: Why? Because they don't want to go to bed etc.
WORDS: ache, toothache, stomach ache
WORDS: earache, headache
GRAMMAR: An ache is a continuous physical pain, such as toothache, headache, stomach ache, earache etc.
QUESTION: What is an ache? An ache is a continuous ...
QUESTION: What might you get if you ate too much? I might get stomach ache if I _
QUESTION: Where should you go if you get toothache? I should go to the dentist's if I _
QUESTION: What kind of things give you a headache? The kind of things that give me a headache are noise, too much work, hot weather etc.
WORDS: rule, confuse
QUESTION: Who was the last person to rule your country ? ... was the last person to rule my country
QUESTION: Do you understand the rules of football? Yes, I understand... - No. I don't understand _
QUESTION: Do the rules of English grammar sometimes confuse you? Yes, the rules of English
QUESTION: grammar sometimes confuse me
QUESTION: Do you find computers confusing? Yes. I find.. - No, I don't find _
QUESTION: Would you be confused if I suddenly walked out of the room for no reason and didn't come back? Yes. I'd be confused if you _
WORDS: ought
GRAMMAR: "Ought" has the same meaning as "should", but it must be followed by the infinitive with "to". For example, instead of saying "I should go now", we say "I ought to go now”. In normal everyday conversation, "should" is more common than "ought".
QUESTION: What can we say instead of "should"?, We can say "ought" _
QUESTION: Give me an example, please. I ought to call my dad because it's his birthday
QUESTION: When we borrow money, ought we to pay it back as soon as possible? Yes. when we.... we ought to _
QUESTION: What ought we to do before crossing the road? We ought to look both ways before...
QUESTION: Do you think children ought to be allowed to go to bed whenever they want? No. I don't think children ought to _
WORDS: rough, smooth, surface, seasick
WORDS: roughly
QUESTION: Is the surface of this table rough? No, the surface it's smooth
QUESTION: When we speak about the sea, we usually describe It as "calm" instead of "smooth”.
QUESTION: When you travel by boat, do you prefer the sea to be rough? No, when I travel by boat, I don’tI prefer it to be calm
QUESTION: Why? Because a rough sea makes me feel seasick ...
QUESTION: If someone tells you that they're feeling rough, what do they mean? If someone tells me.... they mean they aren't feeling very well
QUESTION: Roughly how many people would you say there were in Spain (or Russia, China etc.)? I'd say there were roughly _
QUESTION: Do you like rough weather? Yes. I like rough weather ~ No, I don't like rough weather; I prefer calm weather
QUESTION: Which do you think is the roughest sport one can play? I think maybe rugby is the roughest...
WORDS: ground, level, underground
WORDS: railway, ground floor, grounds
GRAMMAR: By the word "ground", we usually mean the surface of the land.
QUESTION: What do we usually mean by the word "ground"? By the word "ground", we usually...
QUESTION: Are there any shops in this town built below the level of the ground (or ground level)? Yes, there are some... - No, there aren't any ...
QUESTION: Where?
QUESTION: When a table is not level, what must we do? When a table.... we must put something under one of its legs
QUESTION: Has this town got an underground railway? Yes. this town's got... - No, this town hasn't got ...
QUESTION: What’s on the ground floor of this building? There's (or there are) _. on the ground floor of this building
QUESTION: Where's the biggest football ground in this town? The biggest football ground in this town is...
QUESTION: Are the grounds of some famous old buildings in this country open to the public? Yes, the grounds..
WORDS: educate, educated
QUESTION: How can parents start educating their children before they go to school? Parents can _ by teaching them to read and write etc.
QUESTION: What do we mean by an educated person? By an educated person, we mean somebody who has continued their studies to a high level
WORDS: Making a suggestion
GRAMMAR: Here are four common ways in which we can make a suggestion: 1) Shall we go to the cinema? 2) Let's go to the cinema. 3) How (or What) about going to the cinema? 4) Why don't we go to the cinema?
QUESTION: Tell me four common ways in which we can make a suggestion, please. Four common ways in which we can make a suggestion are:
1) Shall we wait for him?
2) Let's wait for him.
3) How (or What) about waiting for him?
4) Why don't we wait for him?
WORDS: The imperative, order
GRAMMAR: When we want to say something stronger than just a suggestion, or even order someone to do something, we use the imperative. In English, the imperative is very easy: we just use the infinitive without "to". For example, we say "Go away!" For a negative imperative, we put the word "don't" before the infinitive. For example, we say "Don't go away!"
QUESTION: How do we make the imperative in English? We make the imperative in English by using the infinitive without "to"
QUESTION: Give me some examples, please. Give me the book! Do it now! Have a nice day!
QUESTION: How do we make a negative imperative? We make a negative imperative by putting the word "don't" before the infinitive
QUESTION: Give me some examples, please. Don't give him the book! Don't be late! Don't forget to email me!

Lesson 87
WORDS: overeat, oversleep, overwork
WORDS: overcook, undercook, overpay, underpay
GRAMMAR: When we put the word "over" before a verb, it sometimes means to do something excessively.
QUESTION: What does it sometimes mean when we put the word "over" before a verb? When we put the word "over" before a verb, it sometimes means...
QUESTION: Give me some examples, please. oversleep; overeat etc.
QUESTION: What might happen if we overate? If we overate, we might get stomach ache
QUESTION: Have you ever been late for work (or school) because you've overslept? Yes, I've _ - No, I've never..
QUESTION: Are nurses and doctors in busy hospitals often overworked? Yes, nurses and doctors...
GRAMMAR: Some verbs, like "overcook" or "overpay", form their opposite with the word "under" - e.g. "undercook", "underpay".
QUESTION: What are the contraries of "overcook" and "overpay"? The contraries of "overcook" and "overpay" are "undercook" and "underpay"
QUESTION: What do we mean when we say that somebody is underpaid for the work they do? When we say that..., we mean they are not paid enough for the work they do
WORDS: charge, serious, commit, battery
WORDS: service
QUESTION: What happens to people who are charged by the police with committing serious crimes? People who are charged... are first taken to court, and then, if they are found guilty, they are sent to prison
QUESTION: How would you feel if you were told to charge the enemy in a battle? If I were told ..., I'd probably feel very afraid
QUESTION: If you had to be in charge of a big business, what kind of business would you choose? If I had to..., I’d choose...
QUESTION: If you were seriously overcharged in a restaurant, would you ask to speak to the manager? Yes, if I were.... I’d ask to _
WORDS: Have you ever refused to pay the service charge in a restaurant? Yes, I’ve... - No. I’ve never _
GRAMMAR: Another use of the word "charge" is in charging a battery, for example in a mobile phone.
QUESTION: What's another use of the word "charge”? Another use...
QUESTION: How often do you have to recharge your mobile? I have to recharge my mobile...
WORDS: clear, as regards
QUESTION: Was the sky clear yesterday? Yes, the sky was... - No, the sky wasn't...
QUESTION: Can you make yourself clearly understood when you speak English in everyday situations? Yes. I can make myself clearly understood when I _
QUESTION: At what time of day are the streets usually at their clearest as regards traffic? The streets are usually _
QUESTION: Who clears the tables in a restaurant? The waiters and waitresses clear _
WORDS: guest, host/hostess
WORDS: invite
QUESTION: If you invited me to your house, would you be my guest or my host/hostess? If I invited you to my house. I'd be your host/hostess
QUESTION: If you could play host to three famous guests, which three famous people would you choose? If I could play.... I'd choose...
WORDS: ridden
QUESTION: What are the three forms of "ride"? The three forms of "ride" are "ride, rode, ridden"
QUESTION: Have you ever ridden a horse? Yes, I've ridden ... - No, I've never ridden ...
QUESTION: Have you ever ridden a bicycle at night without lights? Yes, I've... - No, I've never...
WORDS: severe
QUESTION: If you were a judge, on what kind of criminals would you be most severe? If I were a judge, the kind of criminals I'd be most severe on would be...
QUESTION: Do you get very severe winters in your country? Yes, we get... - No, we don't get...
WORDS: blow
QUESTION: What do people say they see when they receive a blow on the head? People say they see stars when..
WORDS: respect
WORDS: What kind of people do you respect most?, The kind of people I respect most are...
WORDS: company, employ, employer, employee
QUESTION: If you had your own company, would you employ someone simply because they were a friend? Yes, if I had my own company, I'd... - No, if I had my own company, I wouldn't _
QUESTION: What do we employ to cut bread? We employ a knife to cut bread
QUESTION: What do we call a person who employs somebody to work for them? We call _. an "employer"
QUESTION: And what do we call the person who works for them? We call... an "employee"
WORDS: machine, accidentally
QUESTION: Are there a lot of machines in a factory? Yes, there are..
QUESTION: What do we use a cash machine for? We use a cash machine for taking money out of the bank quickly and easily
QUESTION: What could happen if you accidentally put a red sock in a washing machine with white clothes? If I accidentally ..., I could get pink clothes
WORDS: flown
QUESTION: What are the three forms of "fly"? The three forms of "fly" are "fly, flew, flown"
QUESTION: Have you ever flown in a plane? Yes, I've... - No, I've never...
WORDS: draw, drawing, curtain
GRAMMAR: The verb "to draw” means to make a picture with a pencil or pen. It can also mean "to pull". For example, if you draw the curtains, you pull them open or closed. If you draw money from the bank, you put your bank card in a cash machine and take money out.
QUESTION: Are you good at drawing pictures? Yes, I'm... - No, I’m not _
QUESTION: What do we mean by a rough drawing? By a rough drawing, we mean a very simple drawing
QUESTION: What’s the easiest way to draw out cash? The easiest way._ is to use a bank card in a cash machine
QUESTION: What does "to draw the curtains" mean? "To draw the curtains" means to pull them open or closed
DICTATION: All right,/ but the root of the problem/ still remains./ When a man murders another man,/ ought we to put him in prison/ or kill him?/ It's difficult to cross the road/ in safety nowadays./ He lay down quietly/ with his head on the pillow/ and went to sleep./ Your idea sounds exciting./ When we get wet,/ we have to take our clothes off/ and dry them./ I've put your cheese/ in the fridge./ In spite of the fact that/ he looks quite tall,/ he is only average height.

Lesson 88
WORDS: Perfect continuous
WORDS: Present participle, if... then
GRAMMAR: We form the perfect continuous tenses by using the verb "have", the word "been" and the present participle of the main verb.
Present perfect continuous:, I have been working
Past perfect continuous:, I had been working
Future perfect continuous:, I will have been working
QUESTION: How do we form the perfect continuous tenses? We form... by using the verb ''have", the word "been", and the present participle of the main verb
QUESTION: Give me an example, please. I have been studying for two hours
GRAMMAR: We use the present perfect continuous to say how long an action has been in progress so far. We are "measuring" the duration of the action up to now. For example, if you arrive at work at 9 a.m.. then at 10 a.m. you can say "I have been working for one hour so far*'; later, at 11 a.m.. you can say "I have been working for two hours so far".
QUESTION: When do we use the present perfect continuous? We use the present perfect continuous to say how long an action has been in progress so far
QUESTION: Give me an example, please. I have been living in this house for six months so far
GRAMMAR: We use the past perfect continuous to communicate the duration of an action up to a particular point in the past. We are "measuring" how long the action had already been in progress at that point. For example, the sentence "I had been cooking for twenty minutes when she arrived" means that I started cooking and then twenty minutes later she arrived.
QUESTION: When do we use the past perfect continuous? We use the past perfect continuous to communicate the duration of an action up to a particular point in the past
QUESTION: Give me an example, please. I had been living in this house for one month when I bought my new bed
GRAMMAR: We use the future perfect continuous to communicate the duration of an action up to a particular point in the future. For example, "At the end of this lesson, we will have been studying for... minutes".
QUESTION: When do we use the future perfect continuous? We use the future perfect continuous to communicate the duration of an action up to a particular point in the future
QUESTION: Give me an example, please. I will have been living in this house for eight months at the end of this year
QUESTION: How long had you been sitting in this room for when I came in? I had been sitting in this room for... when you came in
QUESTION: Since when have you been studying English? I've been studying English since _
QUESTION: How long will you have been living in this place for when this year (or season) ends? I'll have been living in this place for... when this year (or season) ends
QUESTION: Since when? Since ...
GRAMMAR: Notice that there is no important difference between saying "I have been living here for two months" and "I have lived here for two months". When speaking about duration, we can normally use either the perfect continuous tenses or the perfect tenses.
QUESTION: What's the difference between saying "I have been living here for two months" and "I have lived here for two months"?
QUESTION: There is no important difference between saying...
WORDS: ruler
QUESTION: Who was the last ruler of your country? The last ruler of my country was ...
QUESTION: Could you draw a completely straight line without the help of a ruler? No, I couldn't...
WORDS: earth, astronomical, geographical
QUESTION: Generally speaking, what's the difference between "Earth" and "world"? Generally speaking,... is that we use the word "Earth" in the astronomical sense, and "world" in the geographical sense
QUESTION: How far's the Earth from the sun? The Earth's about 93,000,000 miles from the sun (or 150,000,000 kilometres)
QUESTION: What's mud? Mud's a mixture of earth and water
WORDS: by means of, public, transport
QUESTION: By what means can we draw a straight line? We can draw.. by means of a pen or a pencil and a ruler
QUESTION: By what means do you come to school? I come to school by (means of a) bus, train, car etc.
QUESTION: Would you rather have your own means of transport than use public transport? Yes, I'd rather have... - No, I wouldn't rather have ...
QUESTION: Why or why not?
QUESTION: As a means of making money, what would you say was the best way? As a means..., I'd say the best way was...
WORDS: figure
QUESTION: What's the best way to maintain a good figure? The best way...
QUESTION: Who do you think was the greatest figure in history? I think ... was the greatest...
QUESTION: How many figures are there in the number of your house? There are... figures in the number of my house
QUESTION: What kind of figure am I drawing in the air with my finger? You're drawing a square
QUESTION: (a circle etc.) in the air with your finger
WORDS: couple, adopt
QUESTION: If a couple can't have a child, what can they do? If a couple _, they can adopt one
QUESTION: If you went to live in another country, do you think you would quickly adopt the way of living in that country? Yes, if
QUESTION: I went to.... I think I'd _. - No. if I went to I don't think I'd _
QUESTION: Why or why not?
WORDS: cruel
QUESTION: Who do you think was the cruellest character in history? I think... was the cruellest _
WORDS: college
QUESTION: What's a college? A college is a kind of school, or part of a university
WORDS: burn
QUESTION: If we put a piece of wood or paper into a flame, what happens to it? If we put _, it burns
WORDS: take a bath
DICTATION: He won first prize/ for being the best student/ in his class./ I'm determined to carry on studying/ until I can speak English/ really well./ My dad taught me/ how to fix my bike./ He was a real gentleman,/ and showed good manners/ in all situations. /Although he is retired,/ he is still very famous/ and can't go out in public/ without being followed by a crowd./ Some people take mud baths/ for their health./ It was after midnight/ when the nurse got an opportunity/ to take a break./ What we eat influences/ the way we feel.

Lesson 89
WORDS: run
QUESTION: What are the three forms of "run"? The three forms of "run" are "run, ran. run"
QUESTION: What's the furthest you've ever run? The furthest I've ever run is _
WORDS: grow - grew - grown
QUESTION: What does the verb "to grow" mean? The verb "to grow" means
QUESTION: What are the three forms of "grow"? The three forms of "grow" are "grow. grew, grown"
QUESTION: At about what age does the average person stop growing physically? The average person..
QUESTION: If you grew tired, what'd you do? If I grew tired, I'd go to bed and sleep, or sit down and rest
QUESTION: What kind of food is grown most of all in this part of the world? The kind of food-, is _
WORDS: matter
QUESTION: What does the word "matter" mean? The word "matter" means "_"
QUESTION: What kind of matter is this book made of? This book is made of paper
QUESTION: Do you think that the possibility of another world war is a serious matter? Yes, I think that...
QUESTION: Are you interested in political matters? Yes, I'm interested ... ~ No, I'm not interested...
WORDS: expect
QUESTION: How long do you expect to continue living in the place where you live now? I expect to continue... where I live now for about...
QUESTION: In a Callan Method lesson, do you expect the teacher to correct the students' mistakes? Yes, in a Callan Method lesson, I expect...
WORDS: Tail questions, tail, confirm
GRAMMAR: If somebody arrives home from work and they look very tired, instead of asking them "Are you feeling tired?", we could say "You're feeling tired, aren't you?" Here, we are using a tail question. We usually use a tail question when we believe something is true, and we want somebody to confirm that we are right.
QUESTION: When do we use a tail question? We use a tail question when we believe something is true, and we want somebody to confirm that we are right
GRAMMAR: With this kind of question, we first say what we believe is true (for example. “You're feeling tired") and then we put the tail question at the end (for example, "aren't you?"). We form the tail question by repeating the first auxiliary verb from the main part of the sentence, and putting it in question form.
QUESTION: How do we form a tail question? We form a tail question by repeating the first auxiliary verb from the main part of the sentence, and putting it in question form
QUESTION: Give me an example, please. He is going to go out tonight, isn’t he?
GRAMMAR: If the main part of the sentence is positive, the tail question is negative. If the main part of the sentence is negative, the tail question is positive. For example: "You're Mr Brown, aren't you?" "You aren't Mr Brown, are you?"
GRAMMAR: Right, now I will say something and I want you to repeat it and add a tail question. Remember that, if the main part of the sentence is positive, the tail question is negative, and vice versa.
QUESTION: He's a young man. He's a young man. isn't he?
QUESTION: He isn't a young man. He isn't a young man, is he?
QUESTION: You've got a very nice kitchen. You’ve got a very nice kitchen, haven't you?
QUESTION: You haven't got a very nice kitchen. You haven't got a very nice kitchen, have you?
QUESTION: You can sing. You can sing, can't you?
QUESTION: You can't sing. You can't sing, can you?
QUESTION: He'll be afraid. He'll be afraid, won't he?
QUESTION: He won't be afraid. He won't be afraid, will he?
QUESTION: They would be hungry. They would be hungry, wouldn't they?
QUESTION: They wouldn't be hungry. They wouldn't be hungry, would they?
GRAMMAR: When there is no auxiliary verb in the main part of the sentence, we use the auxiliary verb "do" in the tail question. For example, "You know how to cook, don't you?"
QUESTION: When there is no auxiliary verb in the main part of the sentence, which verb do we use in the tail question ? When there is no.... we use "do” in the tail question
QUESTION: Give me an example, please. They come every Thursday. don't they?
WORDS: right, legal
QUESTION: If you had the right by law to do whatever you wished, what'd you do? If I had the right by law to do whatever I wished. I'd ...
QUESTION: Do newspapers have the legal right to print stories that aren't true? No. newspapers don't 
WORDS: onto
GRAMMAR: We can use the word "on" for things that are moving or still. For example, we can say "I'm putting the book on the table" and also "The book is on the table". We can use the word "onto" only for things that are moving. We can say "I'm putting the book onto the table”, but we can’t say "The book is onto the table".
QUESTION: What's the difference between the words "on" and "onto"? The difference „ is that we can use the word "on" for things that are moving or still, whereas we can use the word "onto" only for things that are moving
QUESTION: Do you think you could jump onto the table with both your feet together? Yes. I think I could._ ~ No, I don't think I could _
QUESTION: Have you ever tried to do something like that? Yes. I've tried to do something like that ~ No. I've never tried to do anything like that
WORDS: tie
QUESTION: Do you know how to tie a tie? Yes, I know... - No, I don't know...
WORDS: elect
WORDS: In the past, was the government of a country generally elected by the people?, No, in the past, the government...

Lesson 90
WORDS: to have something done, homework
GRAMMAR: The structure "to have something done" communicates that we do not do the action ourselves, but that somebody else does it for us. For example. "I do not cut my hair myself; I have my hair cut by the hairdresser". Instead of saying "John is going to repair my computer for me", we can say "I am going to have my computer repaired by John".
QUESTION: What does the structure "to have something done" communicate? The structure "to have something done" communicates that we don't do the action ourselves, but that somebody else does it for us
QUESTION: Give me an example, please. I don't cut my hair myself; I have my hair cut by a hairdresser
QUESTION: Do you clean your shoes yourself or do you have them cleaned by someone else? I clean my shoes myself - I don't clean my shoes myself; I have them cleaned by someone else
GRAMMAR: Instead of the verb "to have" we can use the verb "to get". For example. "I got my hair cut yesterday".
QUESTION: What can we use instead of the verb "to have"? We can use the verb "to get" instead of...
QUESTION: Do very young children sometimes get their homework done for them by their parents? Yes. very young children _
WORDS: power, powerful, laptop, desktop
QUESTION: Do you think governments generally have too much power? Yes. I think ... ~ No, I don't think...
QUESTION: Who do you think is the most powerful person in this country? I think... is the most ...
QUESTION: Do laptops use more power than desktop computers? No, laptops don't _
WORDS: save, rescue, protect, spend
GRAMMAR: The verb "save" can mean "to keep for the future”, “to rescue", "to protect", and "to spend less".
QUESTION: Do you spend all your money or do you try to save some and put it in the bank? I spend all my money -I don't spend all my money; I try to save some and put it in the bank
QUESTION: If you saw someone in difficulty in the sea, how would you try to save their life? If I saw ... I'd try to save their life by _
QUESTION: What does an old man carry to save himself from falling over while walking? An old man carries a walking stick to save..
QUESTION: Would you save any time if you used a different means of transport to come to school? Yes. I'd save some time if I... ~ No, I wouldn't save any time if I...
QUESTION: When you close a computer program, does it usually remind you to save your work first? Yes, when I..., it usually reminds me to save my work first
WORDS: trade, tradesman, skill, bake
WORDS: baker, butcher, builder
QUESTION: What kind of things does your country mainly trade in? My country mainly trades in ...
GRAMMAR: By a trade, we usually mean a job that a person does mainly with their hands, and for which they need a special skill. Some examples of tradesmen are bakers, butchers, builders etc.
QUESTION: What do we usually mean by a trade? By a trade. we usually mean a ...
QUESTION: What's one of the best-paid trades in your country? One of the best-paid trades in my country is...
QUESTION: What's the difference between the words "close" /klaoz/ and "close" /klaus/? The difference between._ is that "close" /klaoz/ is a verb meaning "shut", whereas "close" /klaos/ is an adjective meaning "near"
QUESTION: What's the closest you've ever been to real danger? The closest I've ever been to real danger was when ...
GRAMMAR: A trip is a journey to a place and back again. For example, a business trip, a trip to the shops, a trip around the world etc.
QUESTION: If you went on a trip to New York, what would you see? If I went.... I'd see _
QUESTION: When people go on business trips, do their companies usually pay for everything? Yes. when people _
QUESTION: Which would you prefer: an exciting trip to a big city for the weekend or a quiet fortnight on the beach? I'd prefer _
WORDS: every now and again
QUESTION: What does the expression "every now and again" mean? The expression "every now and again" means...
QUESTION: Is it a good idea to give one's house a thorough cleaning from top to bottom every now and again? Yes, it's a...
WORDS: no longer
QUESTION: What do you do with clothes that you no longer wear? I... clothes that I no longer wear
WORDS: island
QUESTION: What’s an island? An island is a piece of land completely surrounded by water
WORDS: ocean, Atlantic, Pacific, Indian
QUESTION: Name me some oceans, please. The names _ are the Atlantic Ocean, the Pacific Ocean and the Indian Ocean
WORDS: screen, DVD, CD
QUESTION: Do you prefer to watch films at home on DVD, or at the cinema on the big screen? I prefer..
QUESTION: Do you buy CDs and DVDs more often in the shops or online? I buy CDs _
QUESTION: Is it bad for your eyes to look at a computer screen for too long? Ves, it's bad ...
WORDS: produce
QUESTION: What does your country produce? My country produces
WORDS: boast
QUESTION: What kind of things do people often boast about? People often boast about their jobs, things that they own etc.
WORDS: necessity
WORDS: Is wearing a tie a necessity for some occupations these days? Yes, wearing _
DICTATION: To protect themselves from the rain,/ they threw themselves down/ under the big piece of wood/ that stood against the wall./ If they had not done so./ they would have got/ thoroughly wet./ If we drive carelessly,/ we might have an accident./ However, driving too slowly/ is also fairly dangerous./ It is strange to think/ that from these small beginnings/ we will get a large tree./I gave her some advice/ on caring for her dog./ Each member of a royal family/ has a title.

Lesson 91
WORDS: tell, say
GRAMMAR: The most important difference between "tell" and "say" is that after "tell" we indicate the person we are speaking to, but after "say" we usually do not. For example: I told David that I was going on holiday. I said that I was going on holiday.
QUESTION: What's the most important difference between "tell" and "say"? The most important difference between "tell" and "say" is that after "tell" we indicate the person we are speaking to, but after "say" we usually do not
QUESTION: Give me an example, please. She told him that it was important. She said it was important.
GRAMMAR: After the verb "say", it is possible to indicate the person we are speaking to by using the word "to". For example: I said to David that I was going on holiday. After the verb "tell", however, we don't use "to".
QUESTION: After the verb "say", how is it possible to indicate the person we are speaking to? After the verb "say" it's possible to indicate the person we are speaking to by using the word "to"
GRAMMAR: With direct speech, we normally use the verb "say", and not "tell”. For example: He said "I will see you tomorrow".
QUESTION: For direct speech, which verb do we normally use: "say" or "tell"? For direct speech, we normally use the verb "say"
QUESTION: Give me an example, please. She said "I'm hungry"
GRAMMAR: With indirect speech, we can use either "say" or "tell", but we must use "tell" to report an order, not "say". For example: He told me to go downstairs.
QUESTION: Which of these sentences is correct? 
He told me to go away
or
He said me to go away
The first sentence - He told me to go away - is correct
WORDS: risen
QUESTION: What are the three forms of "rise"? The three forms of "rise" are "rise, rose, risen"
QUESTION: Have you ever risen before the sun has risen? Yes, I've sometimes risen ... ~ No, I've never risen ...
WORDS: gain, transaction, degree
GRAMMAR: The verb "to earn" generally means "to receive money for work done", whereas the verb "to gain" generally means "to get more of something". For example, we can gain strength, time, friends etc., or we can gain money through a business transaction.
QUESTION: What's the difference between "to earn" and "to gain"? The difference between "to earn" and "to gain" is that the verb "to earn" whereas the verb "to gain" _
QUESTION: If you bought a business for $4 million and sold it later for half that amount, would you be gaining by doing so? No. if I ..., I wouldn’t be gaining by doing so; I'd be losing
QUESTION: How much would your loss be? My loss would be $2 million
QUESTION: Does your watch generally gain or lose time, or does it keep perfect time? My watch generally...
QUESTION: What's the best way to gain friends? The best way... is to be nice to people
QUESTION: How long does it take the average student to gain a degree at university in your country? It takes the average student about... in my country
QUESTION: As regards learning a language, would you gain anything by going to the country where it was spoken? Yes, as regards learning a language, I'd gain something by...
QUESTION: Why? Because I'd be able to speak the language every day mark, out of, petrol
WORDS: well-known, trademark
WORDS: Are there any marks on these walls?, Yes, there are... - No. there aren't...
QUESTION: What kind of marks are they? They're...
QUESTION: Who marks your dictations? I mark my dictations myself
QUESTION: How many marks did you get in your last English exam? I got._ marks out of 100 in my...
QUESTION: Which petrol company do you think has the most well-known trademark? I think... has the most well-known trademark
WORDS: base
WORDS: basis, basic
QUESTION: What part of the book is this? It's the bottom, or the base, of the book
QUESTION: What do you consider to be the basis of a good life? I consider... to be the basis of a good life
QUESTION: Is it normal for language learners to continue making basic grammatical mistakes even though they know the rules? Yes, it's normal for...
QUESTION: What do you think is basically the difference between your own language and English? I think that, basically, the difference between my own language and English is...
WORDS: include
QUESTION: When you stay at a hotel for one night, does the price you pay usually include breakfast? Yes, when you stay at... ~ No. when you stay at...
WORDS: brush
QUESTION: What do we use to clean our shoes with? We use a shoe brush to clean ...
QUESTION: What other kinds of brushes are there? There are hairbrushes, toothbrushes, paintbrushes etc.
WORDS: box
QUESTION: Do you like to watch boxing? Yes, I like... - No. I don't like...
QUESTION: Why or why not?
WORDS: type
QUESTION: What type of film do you watch most? I watch...
QUESTION: Can you type? Yes, I can type - No, I can't type
QUESTION: How many words a minute? About... words a minute
WORDS: previous, occasion, wedding, video
QUESTION: Have you met me on many previous occasions? Yes, I've met you... - No, I haven't met you...
QUESTION: Did you have any previous experience of the Callan Method before you came here? Yes, I had some... before I came here ~ No, I didn't have any... before I came here
QUESTION: Why do people often make videos of special occasions like weddings? People often... so that they can remember them better
WORDS: plan, interfere, interference
QUESTION: What do we mean by a street plan of a town? By a ... we mean a map showing the streets of the town and their names
QUESTION: Do you usually write your plans in a diary? Yes, I usually write my... ~ No, I don’t usually write my
QUESTION: Do you think it's a good idea for teenagers to plan their futures whilst still at school? Yes, I think ... - No, I don't think ...
QUESTION: Why or why not?
QUESTION: Do you think a young person should be allowed to plan their own future without the interference of their parents? Yes, I think ... - No, I don't think
QUESTION: Why or why not?
WORDS: strange-looking
DICTATION: Some people/ have the manners of a pig./ Although he has lain in bed/ for several hours,/ he is still awake./ They did not notice/ the strange-looking house./ When people owe us a lot of money,/ we ought really to have a piece of paper/ with their signature on it/ and the amount they owe./ The servant took great pride/ in his work at the palace./ The lorry ran over some glass,/ and so we had to get out/ and change/ one of the wheels.

Lesson 92
WORDS: The two types of auxiliary verb
WORDS: primary, modal
GRAMMAR: English has two basic types of auxiliary verb: primary auxiliaries and modal auxiliaries (or "modals").
QUESTION: What are the two basic types of auxiliary verb in English? The two basic types of auxiliary verb in English are primary auxiliaries and modal auxiliaries
GRAMMAR: There are three primary auxiliaries: "be", "have” and "do". We use them to make basic verb structures.
QUESTION: What are the primary auxiliaries? The primary auxiliaries are the verbs "be", "have" and "do"
GRAMMAR: We use the auxiliary "be" to make the continuous tenses, for example when we say ”1 am speaking English now". We also use it for the passive voice, for example when we say "This book was printed in England".
QUESTION: When do we use the auxiliary "be"? We use the auxiliary "be" to make the continuous tenses and the passive voice
QUESTION: Give me an example, please. I am speaking English now. This book was printed in England.
GRAMMAR: We use the auxiliary "have" for the perfect tenses, for example when we say "He has gone to Scotland".
QUESTION: When do we use the auxiliary "have"? We use the auxiliary "have" for the perfect tenses
QUESTION: Give me an example, please. He has gone to Scotland
GRAMMAR: We use the auxiliary "do" for the present simple and past simple, for example when we say "I don't speak Spanish" or "Did she eat the pasta?"
QUESTION: When do we use the auxiliary "do"? We use the auxiliary "do" for the present simple and past simple
QUESTION: Give me an example, please. I don't speak Spanish.
QUESTION: Did she eat the pasta?
GRAMMAR: There are ten common modals: "can", "could", "will", "would", "may", "might", "shall", "should", "must" and "ought". Modals normally express ideas about necessity or possibility.
QUESTION: What are the ten common modals? The ten common modals are "can", "could", "will", "would", "may", "might", "shall", "should", "must" and "ought"
QUESTION: What ideas do modals normally express? Modals normally express ideas about necessity or possibility
GRAMMAR: Now, I will give you a sentence, and you say a sentence with the same meaning, but with a modal:
QUESTION: John is able to speak French. John can speak French
QUESTION: Perhaps he works in a bank. He may (or might) work in a bank
QUESTION: It is necessary for me to go to bed now. I must go to bed now
QUESTION: You are not allowed to smoke in this building. You can't (or mustn't) smoke in this building
GRAMMAR: After a modal, we put the infinitive without "to". For example, we say "I must go", and not "I must to go". The only exception to this rule is "ought". We say. for example. “I should call my mum soon”, but if we express the same idea with "ought", we say "I ought to call my mum soon".
QUESTION: What do we put after a modal? We put the infinitive without "to" after a modal
QUESTION: Give me an example, please. I must send this email today
QUESTION: Which modal is the only exception to this rule? "Ought" is the only exception to this rule
QUESTION: Give me an example, please. I ought to see a doctor
WORDS: set
QUESTION: What does the word "set" mean? The word "set" means"..."
QUESTION: How long is the time set for a game of football? The time set... is 90 minutes; that is, 45 minutes each way
QUESTION: What kind of life do you think is better: a life where you have a set time for doing everything, such as eating, sleeping etc., or a life where you do these things whenever you want?
QUESTION: I think a life where you _ is better than a life where you _
QUESTION: What did I set down on the table when I came into the room at the beginning of the lesson? You set your book down on the table when you...
QUESTION: If your watch isn't showing the right time, what do you have to do? If my watch... I have to set it right
WORDS: sunrise, sunset
QUESTION: What time is sunrise at the moment? Sunrise is at about _ at the moment
QUESTION: And what time is sunset? Sunset is at about...
WORDS: duty, society, on duty
WORDS: off duty, driver, fine
QUESTION: What do you consider to be the duty a person owes to the society in which they live? I consider that the duty... is to be honest, hard-working etc.
QUESTION: What are the duties of a policeman? The duties... are to give people help and information, catch criminals etc.
QUESTION: Do policemen wear their uniforms when they're off duty? No. policemen don't wear...; they only wear them when they're on duty
QUESTION: If you brought a foreign car into this country, would you have to pay duty on it? Yes, if I..., I'd have to... - No. if I.... I wouldn't have to _
QUESTION: And if you didn't pay, what'd happen? If I didn't pay, they might make me pay a fine, and even take the car away from me
WORDS: various
QUESTION: What are the various ways of learning a language? The various ways... are at school with a teacher, going to the country where the language is spoken, practising with a friend, listening to the radio, watching TV etc.
WORDS: entertainment
QUESTION: Is there much entertainment for teenagers in your home town? Yes, there is a lot of._ in my home town - No, there isn't much _ in my home town
WORDS: weight, equal
QUESTION: Is the weight of these two chairs about equal? Yes, the weight of...
WORDS: operate, operation
QUESTION: Would you find it interesting to operate a factory machine? Yes, I'd find it... - No, I wouldn't find it...
QUESTION: Why or why not?
QUESTION: Have you ever had an operation in hospital? Yes, I've had _ - No, I’ve never had _

Lesson 93
WORDS: by
WORDS: by the time
GRAMMAR: When we are speaking about time, the word "by" can mean "at some point before" or "not later than". For example. "I will be home by midnight" means that I will arrive home at some point before midnight, or possibly at midnight, but certainly not later than midnight.
QUESTION: Give me a sentence containing the words "by the time". By the time she gets here, dinner will be ready
QUESTION: What does "by the time" mean in that sentence? "By the time" in that sentence means at some point between now and when she gets here
QUESTION: By the time you are ninety years old. do you suppose your hair will be grey? Yes, by the time I'm ninety years old, I suppose my..
QUESTION: Will your English have improved by this time next month? Yes, my English will _
WORDS: as well as
QUESTION: Can you speak English as well as you speak your own language? No, I can't speak English as well as I speak my own language; I speak it worse than my own language
QUESTION: Do you take English lessons on Sunday as well as during the week? Yes. I take... ~ No, I don't take...
QUESTION: What does that last question mean in other words? That last question means "You take English lessons during the week, but do you also take English lessons on Sunday?"
WORDS: elder
WORDS: eldest
GRAMMAR: We generally use the words "elder" and "eldest" instead of "older" and "oldest" when speaking about people in the same family. However, we cannot say "elder than". For example, we cannot say "My sister is elder than me"; we must say "My sister is older than me".
QUESTION: What's the difference between the words "older" and "elder"? The difference between ... is that we generally use the word “elder** when speaking about people in the same family, and we cannot say “elder than"
QUESTION: Have you got an elder brother? Yes. I've got... - No. I haven't got _
QUESTION: Are you the eldest in your family? Yes. I'm... ~ No. I'm not...
QUESTION: Who is?
WORDS: let, rent, advertise, in exchange for
GRAMMAR: The difference between "to let” and "to rent" is that “to let" means to lend something in exchange for money, whereas "to rent" means to borrow something in exchange for money.
QUESTION: What's the difference between "to let" and "to rent"? The difference between “to let" and "to rent" _
QUESTION: Supposing you had a house or a flat to let, how would you advertise it? Supposing I had.... I'd advertise it in the newspaper or on the internet
QUESTION: What's the average monthly rent for a small flat in this town? The average... is _
QUESTION: How much does it cost to rent a car for one day in this town? It costs about...
QUESTION: Do you ever rent DVDs to watch at home? Yes. I sometimes~ No. I never „
GRAMMAR: We can sometimes say "to rent out”, instead of "to let".
QUESTION: Is it common in your country for people to rent out rooms in their house - to students, for example? Yes. it's common in my country... - No. it isn't common in my country _
WORDS: fallen
QUESTION: What are the three forms of "fall"? The three forms of "fall" are "fall, fell, fallen"
QUESTION: Have you ever fallen out of bed in the middle of the night? Yes, I've fallen ... ~ No, I've never fallen...
WORDS: chose
QUESTION: What's the past of the verb "to choose"? The past of the verb "to choose" is "chose"
QUESTION: Did you choose the clothes you're wearing yourself? Yes, I chose the clothes I'm wearing myself ~ No, I didn't choose the clothes I'm wearing myself; someone else chose them for me
WORDS: such a...
QUESTION: Why do you suppose football is such a popular game? I suppose football is such a popular game because...
WORDS: Why is a desert such a difficult place to live in?, A desert is... because there is so little water
WORDS: provide, providing, provided, ghost
QUESTION: Is a soldier's uniform provided for him by the government? Yes. a soldier's uniform is...
QUESTION: How do parents provide for their children?, Parents... by making sure they have all the things they need in life
QUESTION: If you had just bought a house and then someone told you there was a ghost in it, what would you do, providing, of course, you believed in ghosts?, If I had just bought a house and then someone told me there was a ghost in it. I'd..., providing I believed in ghosts
QUESTION: In that last sentence, instead of using the word "providing", we could have used "provided". Both forms have the same meaning.
WORDS: straight
WORDS: Are you going to go straight home after the lesson? Yes. I'm going to go ...
WORDS: - No, I'm not going to go ...
WORDS: If you came to some crossroads while driving a car and, instead of stopping, you kept straight on, what might happen?
WORDS: If I came to... I kept straight on, an accident might happen
WORDS: consist
WORDS: How many days does a fortnight consist of?, A fortnight consists of fourteen days
WORDS: place
QUESTION: Why do we have to place an egg carefully on the table? We have to ... because it could easily break
WORDS: commence, academic
QUESTION: In which month does the academic year commence in your country? The academic year... in my country
WORDS: colony
DICTATION: The plural of mouse is mice./ He got a bad throat/ from speaking too much./ The colonies in America/ later developed/ into a large nation./ The TV was too loud,/ so we turned it down./ They just could not understand/ the reason for their tiredness./ Some people like living alone;/ others hate it./ In my opinion,/ the kitchen is too small./ There were several copies of the book/ in the library./ I cannot cycle any further;/ I am too tired.

Lesson 94
WORDS: appear, disappear, appearance
WORDS: get to know
QUESTION: What's my hand doing? Your hand is appearing and disappearing (from under the table)
QUESTION: Does it appear to you that people in the world are becoming happier or less happy? It appears to me that...
OTHER: Why?
QUESTION: Do you judge people by appearances or do you wait until you get to know them well? I judge people by appearances - I don't judge people by appearances; I wait until I get to know them well
QUESTION: Which way of judging is fairer? Judging people after getting to know them well is fairer
WORDS: double
QUESTION: If we double the number 25, what do we get? If we we get 50
QUESTION: How wide is a double bed? A double bed is about double the width of a single bed
WORDS: trouble, take the trouble, lookup
WORDS: dictionary, modern
QUESTION: Do you have trouble remembering all the rules of grammar in English? Yes, I have... ~ No, I don't have...
QUESTION: When children get into trouble, do they sometimes tell lies in order to get themselves out of trouble? Yes, when children...
QUESTION: When you are reading a book in your own language and you see a word you don't know the meaning of, do you take the trouble to look it up in a dictionary or do you just keep on reading? When I'm reading .... I take... ~ When I'm readingI don't take...; I just...
QUESTION: Do dreams sometimes trouble you at night? Yes, dreams sometimes trouble me at night - No, dreams never trouble me at night
QUESTION: What do you think is the trouble with modern life? I think the trouble...
WORDS: Change of spelling with comparison of adjectives
WORDS: final, spelling
GRAMMAR: When an adjective ends in a single consonant preceded by a single vowel, the consonant is doubled when we form the comparative and superlative. For example, "big - bigger than - the biggest".
QUESTION: When do we double the final consonant of an adjective in forming its comparative and its superlative? We double the final... when it ends in a single consonant preceded by a single vowel
QUESTION: Give me an example, please. thin - thinner than - the thinnest
GRAMMAR: When an adjective ends in a consonant plus "y" the "y" is changed to "i". For example, “happy - happier than - the happiest".
QUESTION: What happens when an adjective ends in a consonant plus "y"? When an adjectivethe "y" is changed to "i"
QUESTION: Give me an example, please. lucky - luckier than - the luckiest
WORDS: though
QUESTION: Give me an example of the word "though", please. I didn't like the food he cooked; I ate it though. Though she was feeling ill, she went on the business trip.
WORDS: delay
QUESTION: When you have something unpleasant to do, do you delay doing it, or do you do it at once without delay? When I have..., I delay doing it - When I have..., I do it at once _
QUESTION: Which is better though: to delay doing things or to do things at once without delay? It’s usually better to do things at once without delay
QUESTION: When pupils are late for lessons, what kind of things have usually delayed them? When pupils.... the kind of things that have... are ...
WORDS: across, come across, forest
QUESTION: What must you do before you walk across the road? I must look both ways before I
QUESTION: What can you see across the street (or road, field etc.) from this window? I can see ... across the street from this window
QUESTION: If you can't get across a river by bridge, how can you get across? If you can't... you can get across by boat or by swimming across
QUESTION: If you were walking in a forest and suddenly came across a tiger, what'd you do? If I were.... I'd ...
WORDS: work, tell
QUESTION: If a lift isn't working, what do we have to do? If a lift.... we have to take the stairs
QUESTION: Do you think it's possible to tell a person's character just by looking at their face? Yes, I think ... - No, I don't think ...
QUESTION: Can we often tell where somebody comes from by their accent? Yes. we can..
WORDS: luggage, check in, check out
WORDS: reception, receptionist
QUESTION: When you arrive at a hotel, where do you check in? When you arrive _ at the reception desk
QUESTION: And what does the receptionist hand you when you've finished checking in? The receptionist hands you the key to the room when _
QUESTION: On the day you leave a hotel, what time do you usually have to check out by? On the day... by noon
QUESTION: At the airport, do you usually check in all your luggage or do you carry some of it onto the plane with you?
QUESTION: At the airport, I usually check in all my luggage - At the airport, I usually carry some of my luggage onto the plane with me
WORDS: defend
QUESTION: If someone says things about you which are not true, do you think it's better to defend yourself or just keep quiet?
WORDS: congratulations
QUESTION: On what occasions do we say "Congratulations!" to people? We say _ when they pass an exam, get married, have a baby etc.
DICTATION: The arrow/ flew through the air/ and hit the tree/ in the middle./ He looked very strange;/ he had fair hair/ but a dark beard./ I do not know/ how much they gave him,/ but it was a large amount./ She goes to the same cafe/ every morning for a snack./ Poor John was not invited/ to Mary's birthday party./ I am sorry,/ but I have already thrown/ the old cooker away;/ it was too dangerous to keep. If someone says things about me.... I think _

